{"Episode Name": "A Theory of Media That Explains 15 Years of Politics", "Podcast Name": "Ezra Clein Show - New York Times", "Episode Link": "https://nytimes.com/2025/02/25/opinion/ezra-klein-podcast-martin-gurri.html", "duration": "01:03:51", "text": " This is a message from sponsor into it TurboTax. Taxes was waiting to get your money back, which turned into worrying about getting your money back. Now, taxes is matching with a TurboTax expert who can do your taxes today and help you get you up to a $4,000 refund-advanced loan fast. Get an expert now on TurboTax.com, only available with TurboTax Live Full Service. Refund Advanced has $0.00 loan fees and 0% APR. Refund Advanced loans may be issued by 1st Century Bank, NA, or WebBank. Times Apply, subject to approval. Before we begin today, a quick announcement. My book Abundance is coming out on March 18th. It is available for pre-order now. And we are also setting up the tour. So we have a little link today in the show description to the tour page. You can see if we're coming to a city near you, at least as of yet there will be more stops on this to be added. And grab a ticket before they sell out. So if you want to come join us in person, come check that out. From New York Times opinion, this is the Ezra Klein Show. Back in 2016, when Donald Trump won the first time, there was this book itself published by a former CIA media analyst named Martin Gurry. They became a kind of phenomenon in Silicon Valley. The book is called The Revolt of the Public. And what it did was describe these informational dynamics. It described the way that politics was changing because media was changing because media and information got from scarce to abundant. And that had created constant recurrent crises for whoever was in power. The ability to control a narrative was gone. And in this world of fractured media, there was always an incentive and always an ability to show what was wrong with whoever was ruling. And this was Gurry argued fundamentally unstable. It knew how to destroy. It did not know how to build. Gurry has in his own politics of all. He didn't vote in 2016 or 2020. But he voted for Trump in 2020. He's become much more positive about Trump this time than the first time. He's a visiting scholar at Mercatus and he writes for the free press and discourse and the city journal among others. I've watched him come to the view that actually maybe Trump is building something more stable. Maybe this revolt of the public is not merely negation, but that what Trump and Musk represent and are doing is actually the creation of a positive agenda that might endure. So I also thought his argument was worth hearing out. As always my email as raklancho at nytimes.com. Martin Gurry, welcome to the show. Great to be here. So in 2014 you published this book, The Revolt of the Public. Lay out the basic argument you were making about attention and media and publics. Well, the argument of the book goes back to my days at CIA where I was one of the least sexy jobs you could have. I was a analyst of global media and it was a relatively straightforward job. I mean you could have said, President asked you how are my policies playing in France. You wanted two newspapers that were considered those sources authoritative. That's what we call them. Around the turn of the century, this digital earthquake generated this tsunami of information that was essentially unparalleled in human history. There's numbers backing that up. We just got swamped. The first response of course is somebody who deals with authoritarian information is what's authoritative with this infinite massive stuff. The second part was what's the effect of it? All right, what is the effect of going from a world where information is extremely valuable to one that is so abundant that you don't know what it's worth. And there was a tsunami of information that we could track it as different countries digitize and right behind it, we could see ever increasing levels of social and political turbulence. So the book is trying to explain that. What became very clear was that our entire 21st century set of the institutions that hold up modern life, government, the media, business, academia, or shape to the 20th century, very top down, very high-archical, very, I talk you'll listen. So what the internet did, what the digital revolution did was essentially create the possibility of this gigantic information sphere that was outside of the institutions. And it turned to the institutions. And the first one that it turned to was your business media. It was this big fight between the blogs and the mainstream media was the enemy. And sure enough, when that happens, you can find many errors and many mistakes. And some bad faith in the institutions. And I think it's institutional failure and elite failure that sets the information agenda on the web. I mean, that's pretty clear. It can be any number of things, but the total effect of that is a gigantic erosion of trust in the institutions which then builds up this digital world that is non-institutional even stronger. So it's kind of an inversion of what had gone on before. Before you had the Walter Cronkach's of the world, very respected. Trust in man in America. Think of a journalist such as yourself being voted the most trusted man in America today. It's not even a joke. It can be time. Okay, Walter. One thing that I took from your book and that's held with me for a long time is that you have to understand media and attention as a separate causal stream into politics. And I don't think we like to do that. We like to think about politics as a relentlessly rational response to most material conditions, maybe cultural conditions, maybe the quality of elites, maybe the quality of governance, maybe inflation. And I understood what you were saying then. You can tell me if this is wrong that there was no this other dynamic happening, which is that the nature of the information flow now, it just creates a constant pressure for distrust that fractured media will always point out the problems in governance, creating very fast backlashes to whatever the status quo is. Such as the status quo is get overturned and overturned and the populist right comes in over the establishment that may become unpopular. The establishment comes back that it's as endless a ricocheting, but that's not necessarily just about material conditions. It's about the dynamics of information having a momentum of their own. Yeah, I mean, I believe that the information structure is one of the most determinative factors in any society, right? It shapes the landscape, it's a ecological force. So if you're dealing with a mass media 20th century style, it's top down again, and you need to have a printing press or a TV station and that takes a certain kind of overhead of money and you can't talk back to it. So the mood of information, that's a slightly martial McLuhanish is I think- Like my heartbeat faster. Yeah. I'm sort of like a semi-m Michael Ones, I think he was right on about a lot of things. And I think one of the things he was right about is the primary aspect as we talk about everything else is downstream for how we exchange information, right? So politics is downstream. Even culture is downstream, okay? Because it gets exchanged in certain media. Now I would say in part you're right that the rise of digital media just crashed into a world constructed around analog media and broke it to pieces. And there's a question of digital media in and of itself, stimulates controversy, stimulates hostility, political hostility, some kind of hostility. But I think also it uncovered a lot of, let's say, negativity, a lot of negation towards the institutions that were almost certainly already there that was masked by that former system, top down. You know, your time is talking down to you. You don't get to pick up your comments section and say, New York Times, you're wrong, or to go to excellent, New York Times, you're wrong. Not you just got to either throw it away or write a letter to the editor or something along those lines. So I think a lot of the hostility, a lot of the negation, a lot of what's happened with the public, which is now, it's a global phenomenon. It's by no means we Americans are very provincial. By no means an American monopoly. This rise was there. It was just masked by the previous information system. And this information system stimulated, but also releases it. Here's a question that I think about a fair amount. Do you think the institutions of today, the elites of today, across different domains, media, military, government, economics, business, do you think they're worse than they were or we have access to so much more contraindformation and critique of them, do we think they're worse than they were? Or does access to all that information make them worse than they were because they've less room to move into to act into correct mistakes? There is no question that we think that they were as good as we know so much more about them, right? I mean, how many sex scandals that we know about today would never have come up in the 20th century? I also think, however, that they are particularly bad, and they're particularly bad because they haven't made the leap to the new information system. In other words, in the 20th century, we had people like Kennedy and Reagan, people who were masters of television. They knew the information systems that they were conveying their message on. Today, the elites as a rule, number one, because they're old, but number two, because they're even the young people that have old heads. Number three, because it's a very uncomfortable medium, or because you do get talked back a lot. So I think what we need and what we haven't gotten yet, although this crowd with Trump, that may be the beginning, is people who are just totally comfortable with this crazy information system, Trump, for example, on Twitter. He was like a Beethoven of Twitter in this first term. Basically, he is a guy who said, no, I did everything wrong. Whatever scandal, he's like this gigantic bull seal with a hide, so thick that no matter what you stab that thing with, it just doesn't even touch him. He's full of scars, but that's his magic. That is the guy's magic, is that he's already done a little things. You can't find a skeleton in my closet because all the skeletons are right here in my living room, and you can see them, and I don't care. My fore that, no. But it gives you some idea of how you need a kind of an elite that deals with the fact that whatever you do, if you project an image that is false, you're going to crash. You're going to burn and crash. Here's my revolt of the public informed model of the past decade or so in American politics. You have this almost hydraulic informational process by which high engagement movements, people or ideas that create a lot of energy rise. But you then have this counter process by which their opposite then begins to rise as soon as they gain power. So you have Barack Obama who's followed by really his opposite in a striking way in Donald Trump. But then as Donald Trump rises in power, you get this counter-vibed to Donald Trump. The resistance Black Lives Matter, me too, wokeness right. We know, call it. I think Biden's complicated here because he's Barack Obama's vice president, but he's so not of this era that in some ways I think he's informationally almost a pause. But then Trumpism comes roaring back with even more force. But fastenates me about this period is not that it doesn't seem to be selecting for one thing. It is selecting almost endlessly for the strongest thing and then the opposite of the strongest thing. It's a crazy ricochet process. How much do you buy that explanation of what's been going on? What I can say is what you said is true at the descriptive level. Back 4th, back 4th, right. What I think is happening is trial error, trial error, the electorate is searching for somebody to make sense politically out of this moment. And so far everybody has failed. You know, Obama did, okay, he got reelected, but at the end, he did not set the standards for how we deal for politics at the presidential level in a digital age. Trump came out. Biden came out. Now we have Trump. Who knows what's going to happen? If Trump succeeds, it may be that that's the model. The odds are massively against it, just massively against it. Well, let's talk a bit about the Biden era. One thing that you emphasized a lot in that, and you're pretty critical of Joe Biden, is that the form of the elite, the Democratic Party in that era, became defined around what you call politics of control. What's the politics of control? Well, first of all, I want to apologize to Joe Biden. If I had known, I mean, you could see that the guy wasn't there, right? But if I had known the degree to which he really was not in charge of anything, I'll write you on this. I think you're wrong on this. I mean, that's pretty clear to me. Whoever was running the White House during that time, I think, had that impulse to go back to the 20th century. The ideal internet for people like that would be the New York Times circa 1958, or something, it was a front page of the New York Times, 1958. That's the way information should be. And they have converted this into some sort of almost, this is a fairly recent development, and almost ideological construct, where they're now seem to be promoting what you might call a guided society, where ordinary people like me and others need Sherpas to make sure we don't fall off the cliffs and keep going upwards and onwards. We're protected against this information and we're protected against hate, we're protected against all these other things, and attempt to erect a censorship apparatus that would de-emphasize people or silence people, silence certain voices, silence certain opinions, get experts and bureaucrats to basically proclaim the certain truths for false. And it was a futile attempt. I mean, it was completely futile as it was happening. And of course, it led, I think, it paved the way to Trump. You know, I come from Cuba, where a sensor, I don't know you came from Cuba. Oh, yes. It was, by the time I was 10, I had experienced a British-turn right-wing censorship and a left-wing dictatorship that basically killed the media. I mean, there was no media left. So I've pretty touch you about that sort of thing, and I guess I have like antennae that can feel things coming. And thank God for the First Amendment. They can't do it here. Well, let me pick up on something there, because this feels to me like it is completely fundamental right now to the right self-definition. J.D. Vance goes to the Munich conference, tells the Europeans they're doing too much to restrict speech and expression and political expression in their countries. And then I look at what people do. I look at say Elon Musk has made a sister cisgender. He has tagged that as hate speech on X. I'm watching the Trump administration tell all the agencies they have to go through and look for words that are now out of favor, diversity and DEI and things like that. And it all has to be erased. They've ended up knocking out things that didn't mean to knock out because the word just happened to be there in another context. So I kind of see this world of people who I think I understand themselves as free expression warriors. And then as soon as they get into power, whether it's running X or running the government, they certainly seem to me to be on a campaign of censorship. What do you think I'm missing? I mean, I'm missing dimension, I think. The dimension of censorship under Biden, he basically told the platforms, you have to adhere to European standards of good behavior online. Well, the Europeans don't have a First Amendment, right? And the Europeans honestly, we tend to think of it as being just like us. When it comes to speech, and this has always been the case and it is more the case every day, there's a like halfway between us and China. So I think the difference is that, okay, do you as an ordinary person feel like you can say whatever you want? All right, if you don't like X, you can go to blue sky or something, right? But that's true then too. You could go to rumble, you could go to Gab, you could go to truth social. The thing I want to push you on a little bit here, because I'm not saying there was no, I think your point as I take it is interesting that partially what you're saying, people like the Biden Association respond to is an effort to try to get control of an information space that they no longer know how to control and even no longer know how to operate in. But I am struck by seeing very, very aggressive movements from the Trump administration immediately to impose control on what say civil servants can say. So is that a dynamic of the left that you're describing or is it just now in this era of information overload? Actually both sides are fighting for control of it and whatever their professed values as soon as again into power, the thing they really want to do is decide what the boundaries are and what you can say and how you can say it. Well, let's give this give it time. I mean, you may be right. All I have to say is I find it remarkable. You can look at me. I am not a young man, all right? But free speech is a right wing cause. All right. When did that happen? Okay? I mean, you have several, all of them left people, John Kerry recently, be moaning the existence of the first amendment. I have never seen that in my entire life. Everybody always pretended at least they were for free speech. Even when secretly they wanted to control it, even what secretly they were trying to control it, they always talk to talk. And now only on the left, you find people saying, no, we need boundaries. We need this. We need that protection against. So that's my take on that. You may be right. Maybe that this crowd ends up being even worse. So we got to watch that. I don't really, they're not, you know, I am not a, I have an independent politically and have no dogs in the political fight. But in the free speech fight, I'm all in. Okay. Well, tell me about your movement on this. So 2016, you don't vote. 2020, 20, 20, don't vote. 2024. You vote for Donald Trump. What moved you towards him in that period? In a large part, it was that it was free speech. It was normalizing the censorship of things that in the olden days, me as a 60s guy. Okay. Very, very aging hippie. Okay. Felt like, um, this is crazy. This is crazy. This is what we fought for in the 60s was to be able to say whatever we wanted to and to expand that to whatever the limit is that doesn't break down social peace, right? So, um, that was my number one thing. Now number two thing was I just felt like the world was becoming more and more dangerous and I knew, regardless of what you say, that this was an empty skin suit in the White House. And then we were just like a, an airplane on automatic pilot circling and circling, we're ready to run our gas. And I do not love Donald Trump. I never have. But I felt like he was for free speech and he's a live brain in the White House. I was hopefully he will be more than that. But you also say something else that I have found a lot of people felt this time. I, I think it is under estimated how much the meaning of Donald Trump changed from 2016 to 2020 to 2024. And you write that Trump this time had become a kind of mythical figure that he has been, quote, transformed into a living symbol of the aggressive leads abuse of power and contempt for the principle of equality. I've heard something like that from a lot of people and particularly the mythic dimension of Trump. Yes. Tell me what you mean by that and how you felt that change in your own perspective. Well, I can tell you the moment it happened where I saw the word, jeez, okay. It was that near assassination episode where I don't know how lucky you've been. But if you've been lucky, you have never been in a place where the bullets are flying. I come from Cuba. I can tell you when bullets start flying, you think you're a hero until that moment. And then you hit the ground and you make like a pancake, okay. And here's a man who not only was being shot at, but had been hit. And he probably had no idea how badly, all right. And stood up and told the Secret Service agents, I mean, just press this of mine. Your people have knocked my shoes off. I'm going to put on my shoes. I'm going to turn to the crowd. I'm going to say fight, okay. And that number one that took a lot of courage and just basically physical courage. Number two, press of mine, all right. But there's a third element and I don't even know what to do it with that one. I mean, you can call it the, um, providential interpretation of Trump. You know, he thinks that God saved them to make American great again. Or you can give a mathematical explanation. He's kind of like a strange attractor, you know? And these incredible coincidence is keep happening all around him that completely defy the loss of probability, the fact that the bullet missing, that image where he's standing there shaking his fist a destiny. And he's got those Secret Service agents wrapped protectively run. And there's a flag in the background. What are the odds of that thing happening spontaneously? No wonder people think it was acted, right? But if you look at the last, oh, eight years, this one series of bizarre question, how did he beat Hillary Clinton? How did his popularity resurrect from January 6, 2021? How did he just kind of dispose of a pretty good field of Republican aspirants, including proven winners like the Santos, you know, I mean, endless numbers of questions. Every event tends to skew in his direction. You know, you can say that what he did being exiled and coming back was kind of a hero's journey. You know, that's not necessarily a moral quality and he can do many bad things with all those qualities. But part of what I think the mythic side of Trump is the fact that the world around him is not the world around the rest of us. I think there are seasons to the way we understand the world. And I think certainly the Obama era we were in a season of empirics, technocracy. And I don't just mean that in terms of literally the reports people produced and the way they argued. I also mean it in terms of the aesthetic. And this is a point my colleague, Ross Nouth, that is made, but it's also something that I've been thinking about that it has felt to me for some time like we're re-entering a slightly more mystic mythic turn of the wheel. I think you see it in the popularity of Catholicism, right, with its pomp and its circumstance and its strangeness of Greek orthodoxy, you know, the return of astrology as a major force. And something about Trump ended up fitting that for a lot of people at least, right? I'm not saying that I have this particular interpretation of him, but the degree to which, you know, I think even within his own movement, he is treated as, I've said this many times before that he's almost like the grandi atola of national conservatism that even the people who like him don't view him as this precise technical policy thinker, they view him as somebody with a kind of intuitive, almost spiritual connection to the country that they see him leading the people, they see him representing. And then the revolving around involved these other powerful figures like Musk and so on, it made him more like this. It wasn't just his show anymore. He became like this, you know, quasi-heavy godlike or pope-like figure presiding over a moment. Yeah, no, no, I think you're 100% right. That's actually a pretty deep observation. And having lived through a 60s, which was kind of like that, you know, astrology brought it to mind, but there was that sense of mysticism almost of connection to something beyond just everyday life. There must be something more to it than this. I think there's a huge hunger for that right now. I think a lot of our politics sublimate that honestly. It's possible to measure empirically. I don't know how you do that, but I profoundly believe that. I think we have been living through a period of, yeah, I think about my era was cruel, calm, collected, you know, the rule of democracy. And that was very flavorless, I think for a lot of people. People want to admit, and that mean, what is Trump, right? So I think we're beginning this era. I think this more down the road. So let's keep our eyes open because it can manifest itself in a number of good or bad ways. Well, it's also cooperation versus dominance, I think that the promise of the Obama era of Obama himself in a way was you could cooperate your way to this future, right? You could talk your way, think your way through the conflicts. And Trump, and I think something I see people responding to, but I've been in DC this week, talking to people sort of from different factions of the right and something they all say, is that America is strong and we stopped throwing around that strength, that we have the ability to shape events in our image and to our desires and to our interests. And we bound ourselves in ways that we didn't have to, right? We have this huge economy, but we didn't use things like terrorists to make others bend to our will. We let ourselves get taken advantage of by China. We don't do any territorial expansion anymore, right? Things in the 19th century, early 20th century, more common in terms of American policy have become like morally uncommon, not just a thing we don't do, but a thing we don't even consider doing. And Trump is a bringing back of this old spirit, a kind of more domineering frontier-like. You use your strength to reshape the world energy. Yeah. I think there's some truth in that. I was saying that a lot of the people that I know who are pro-Trump feel that he's not their dominator. He's their liberator. He's the guy who's breaking up this very dominating system of institutional governance and allowing the normies as they call themselves to sort of do what they wish, all right? I think the word frontier that you used is critical. And I mean, this is a great country. I mean, I am an immigrant, right? So I kind of feel like a frontier spirit is part of my spirit. I think Americans basically, that's who they are. They have this craving for some far frontier-like thing that they must, you know, master or conquer or populate or coordinate. That's a really matter. The modality doesn't matter. It's the challenge that matters. And I think honestly, under Obama, there was no real challenge. But what we headed towards, you know, it was unclear. And I think for the moment, there will see what Trump. For the moment, the clarity is in the gaseous, undoing that controlling apparatus that they bite in the situation that's set up. This podcast is supported by Oracle. AI requires a lot of compute power and the cost for your AI workloads can spiral. That is unless you're running on OCI Oracle Cloud Infrastructure. This was the Cloud Build for AI, a blazing fast enterprise grade platform for your infrastructure database apps and all of your AI workloads. Right now, Oracle can cut your current cloud bill in half if you move to OCI, minimum financial commitment and other terms apply, offer ends March 31st. See if you qualify at oracle.com slash nyt oracle.com slash nyt. My name is Audra Diaz-Burch and I am a national correspondent covering race and identity for the New York Times. Race coverage is complicated. It can be joyous and affirming. It can be uncomfortable, but I feel like it's still absolutely necessary. Race and identity are not just understanding who you are, but who the person in front of you is and wanting to understand more about them. We're trying to wrestle down these really hard subjects and maybe not answering the question, but asking the right questions and listening, listening, listening a lot. The Times is dedicated to ambitious and deeply reported coverage of race and identity and they're willing to back it up with resources. If you are curious about the world in which we live, if you're interested in who you are, where you come from and how you relate to others, I would encourage you to subscribe to the New York Times. I think if you are a normy liberal, let's call it. The way you are experiencing Donald Trump, Elon Musk, Doge, broadly, the sort of Russell vote, the sort of war on what now it's called the administrative state is as this incredible assertion of powers, maybe even a constitutional crisis. They went in, they just destroyed USAID in a day. That wasn't something that the people thought you could do. They fired huge numbers of federal workers saying it was for cause, even though it had nothing to do with their individual job performance. They've talked out all these probationary workers, right? They've tried to break huge amounts of the federal government, reshape it to their will. The way that has been experienced by liberals is as an extraordinary assertion of control, of power that the executive is not supposed to have. The way you've described it, the way I've seen other people describe it, is as an act of breaking up control. I'd like you to try to describe how it looks from that perspective, thinking about an audience who is experiencing it in the opposite way. Well, I was probably de-amplified by Facebook at some point. I don't even know why I said that when my wife would send out my articles, they got a lot more response than when I send out my articles on Facebook. I think when Mark Zuckerberg saw the lights suddenly realized I don't like censorship anymore, strangely after Donald Trump got elected, I think that is the way that the people on this side, and I'm not a Trumpist, like I said, I believe in free speech and I thought the idea that you were supposed to say certain words. I mean, the right has never had this power, okay? The power to impose certain words, the power to basically come up with entirely new definitions about things that were pretty settled, like who's a man and who's a woman, you know, been settled since Adam and Eve, and all these constantly changing new permutations of ideas that were not intuitive, let's put it that way, but mandatory from the moment I get proclaimed and by whom I don't even know. I had a friend who was a professor and this was like years ago, about five or six years ago and I asked him, what's it like? He says, it's like a mind-clearing operation being in college. You know, college professor, sooner or later, something's going to blow up on you, you know? So it's not just the elites being controlling. It's a culture of control or an ideology of control. There is, I think, an element of revolt to the public in it. So I understand the culture you're reacting to here. I see where you're coming from on that. But I do want to keep focus a little bit on the actual acts of the president here because I'll note that it sort of asks you about the dismantling USAID, which is you've written columns on the actions of Doge, which you've written pieces on, you sort of moved to whether or not Facebook shadow of Andy. I don't know if Facebook shadow of Andy. Yeah, I know they shouldn't have. But the actions of the administration have been, your guy from Cuba, have been the assertion of an extraordinary amount of executive control over the administrative state, things that the, I can tell you the Biden administration did not think they were allowed to do, right? The Obama administration did not think they were allowed to do. The amount of stories I have heard about how difficult it is to work through the privacy regulations of the IRS in order to make social insurance programs be smoother. And in the end, they just weren't that smooth because like everybody is so concerned about privacy and you just couldn't get access to the systems. They just come in and they like bust away to the systems. So again, when you see them doing this and you see this not as the taking of control, but the breaking of a controlling apparatus, try to describe that perspective on it for someone who doesn't share it. I mean, you must know enough liberals to know that they are experiencing this era of Trump and Musk and Doge as like the dawning of authoritarianism. Like how do you tell them to see it from the way you're seeing it? Yeah. I mean, what is authoritarianism? That one, I do know that most of my friends are liberals. They don't think he's authoritarian though. What is he doing to the government? Okay. What I see is being done is the very earliest moment in which AI collides with the analog world that IRS thing you were describing, I mean, I was a bureaucrat for many, many years at the CIA, all right? So I know perfectly well how that works. And yeah. So first of all, there's always controlling mandates in the end. They'll checkmate each other, right? So you have this paralysis and it's all take this sheet of paper, write the memo, take it here, take it there, and the end it gets lost. Nothing happens, right? What you have is Elon Musk applying AI to all those rules and regulations and you can identify exactly where you can go perfectly legal, right? It's not clear that it's perfectly legal. It is not unclear to me. I mean, they're moving so fast and there's probably a lot I don't know. But for example, USAID was set up by executive order. So you can crash that down by executive order. There was no act of Congress. No, it was not by Congress. That's not what I'm saying. In 1998, it was set up by like its current structure was created through Congress. I mean, it is USAID is statute. Well, all I can tell you is I see this as the application of the human AI mind to the analog world and let's put it on the galaxy aside. It allows for the identification of things that can be cut way faster than the analog minds can follow. And I have to ask you, if you want to be an authoritarian, are you going to go back to government? I mean, let me tell you, I have lived on the authoritarianist cutting back the government. It's not what they do. See, but I don't think that they're cutting back the government. I think they are trying to take control of it. I've heard this AI thing from a couple people and I follow it closely and I am open to the idea that one thing Elon Musk wants to do is bring AI into the federal government. I am not super open to the idea that that's what Doge is doing now. For one thing, like with word efficiency, it's always efficiency for what? AI for what? Every AI system has some kind of value function, some kind of prompt you have to be giving it. The question of the prompt is really then the important question. Like yes, you could in theory unleash AI on the entire range of treasury payment data. What are you trying to get it defined? If you're trying to get it defined, fraud, fine. How is fraud defined? What do you say is fraud? I don't even think really, to be honest with you, that's what you think they're doing. Like you wrote a good piece, I think just not from my perspective, about why you thought it was good that they were getting rid of USAID. What was that argument? My take on USAID is that what was the point of it? What was the point of it? And you look at a lot of the progress that we're doing, they clearly wasn't a point of it. They were trying to find some point of it. We give aid. What did we give aid for? Well, in the old days, yeah, we fought the commies. And if we could bribe some government or some movement or something to fight the commies along with us, we didn't care how corrupt that was, it was good. Now they're on our side. But now we're not in that kind of a world anymore. So these people are not sophisticated thinkers of what to do with government mission. And what you were saying, which is to what end, is the ultimate tea. All right? So I am with them so far. But because the government is just such a monstrous bloat that honestly, what they're doing is fingernail bearings. But to what end, do any of these people in the Trump administration have an image in their minds of once we take it to the government and we squeezed it and we broke it and we reshaped it. And that was going to do what? And I am not sure. I have not seen that anywhere. Some maybe marginal people to the musk minions. This is this subside person, mysterious called echo. I don't know if you read his stuff, EKO. He's sort of like as close to an ideology and maybe this fantasy world, but he persuades you that with AI, the president has basically the entirety of the government becomes intelligible. And it becomes intelligible horizontally so you can follow every agency that is trying to find little cutouts and rabbit holes to hide, you know, waste dinner, whatever. But it's also intelligible vertically. So if you're a lot, I look at money for a bridge repair. It can show you the bridge repair of the actual bridge and what's actually being repaired. But I mean, this utopian stuff is very utopian stuff. What word do we get to this bottom up world or whatever? They themselves have not said anything. They have, they're not very articulate about this and it should we be paying attention. Yeah. Should we think that it's authoritarianism? They're doing it. I don't think so. I haven't read EKO. I have seen these sort of like let's put all government on the blockchain kind of ideas before. And both I think they tend to reflect people who are not trying to follow where the government spends this money because actually we know quite a lot about that and people just don't like doing the spade work. But here's one argument. It's sort of an argument that I think you agree with, but I've heard it from other people. So let me try to state it as, as journalists as I can, which is that the administrative state is a unelected fourth branch of government that in this era of the revolt of the public that it is not just frustration about information. It is frustration about unresponsiveness. Government doesn't work. It doesn't do what you tell it to. You don't feel it in your life. And when you do feel it's often not felt in a good way. And particularly for the right because the government is staffed by liberals because liberals like the government better than the right does, you come in as an anti government disruptor like Donald Trump was in 2017 and you find your stymied left and right by these procedures by these processes, by these bureaucrats, by these civil servants. And so what you're trying to do is like break this power center that stands between the people and the government they elect. And I think the thing that I am personally surprised by a little bit is how much the right has adopted this view that the executive is the will of the people and the ideas that you need to give Donald Trump this power because he is the accountable one and it should just do what he says in a pretty much unquestioned way. And that is responsiveness. You break the administrative state. So these populist leaders getting elected atop public dissatisfaction can control it and make whatever it is they think that people want. What really matters honestly is the restoration of trust. I think today, trust has just evaporated. And I think we can discuss the justice of that. And I think there is some justice to it. I think some of it is utopian expectations versus just the way the world actually runs, you know, but there it is. It has evaporated. What is done honestly, as long as there is no law breaking or anything like that, whatever gets done, whatever gets broken, if you can restore the trust of the public and democratic institutions, then you will have done a good thing whether these people can do it. That's a serious question. I think this creates an interesting question about whether or not there is a corollary theory to yours that it's not what we are living through repeatedly right now is not revolts of the public, but revolts of elites. Let me try to make this argument here and see what you think. So you look at the public. It's moving by a couple points in each election. The movable public is narrow. But if you look at the elites who are all on Twitter talking to each other or acts or Facebook or whatever, they're swinging unbelievably far election to election, right? They get elected, you know, Joe Biden gets elected in a fairly narrow election by historical standards and they come in certain, even though they have a 50, 50 cent of majority, that what the public wants is an FDR-sized presidency. The Trump people are all talking to each other on acts on Twitter and they're in these intense communication dynamics with each other. They have, I think, by any measure of very narrow victory and they believe that it's time to remake the entire state. What's really swinging here is not normies. What's really swinging here are elites. They're the ones most exposed to the communication dynamics you're describing because they are really intensely on these platforms talking to each other. Nobody comes in and says, that was a pretty small win. We should kind of be careful here. There's no welfare reforms anymore, right? There's no child left behind. There's no big stops to the other side. It's all we won by a bit and now the revolution. Yeah, there's an element of truth in that. I would say that I think you have the public wrong because the public is not too cited. The public is fractured into many, many, many pieces, all right? And those pieces tend to coalesce, sometimes they do it spontaneously and protest, for example. They don't need a elite to tell them to go to terrier square or pass out of soul or whatever. They mobilize entirely by being against. You take the crowd in terrier square. You had socialists, you had the use of the Muslim Brotherhood, you had just everyday Egyptians. You had all kinds of people that if you ask them, what do we do next? We start fighting with each other. But they were all against Mubarak, all against Mubarak. The public is against. I think against is a very mobile-facing emotion. The thing we have to watch out and have been saying this for years is, okay, take into its logical conclusion, you become an IELAS, right? You basically believe that destruction is a form of progress. Now that's my flag for the Trump guys, right? Are they tearing this out to a purpose? They're going to a purpose. I'm willing to put up with a lot of noise, a lot of mistakes. This is the way this gets done tidily, all right? If there's a purpose and I approve of the purpose, I don't see a purpose, right? But are you doing it just because you can? But I do think it's good to talk about the public because I take your point about terrier square. But here in America, what's amazing in some ways is the stability. We have not had an election decided by more than five points in the popular vote since 2008. And that was during a financial, like once in a generation financial crisis. We keep talking about the public pretty after elections as if it's been these overwhelming things. And which are those most people vote the way they did before, right? Because I think the two party system is a completely artificial construct. The two parties don't really hold too much allegiance anymore. There are among the institutions that have lost a great deal. Just if you look at the numbers, the number of independence keeps growing and what is an independent, well, that's a hundred different things, all right? So I think part of the difficulty of this political moment is that we look at it in very old fashioned ways, a Democrat, Republican. And you look, I look at the ground level and I see this, this fermenting mosaic of different passions. I think it's very fluid. I do think it's very fluid. Maybe the total numbers, overall numbers, not so. And as long as we could give in this choice of Republican and Democrat, maybe I will change. But I'm wondering how long that's going to last. I mean, I wonder about, too, or at least what the nature of being a Republican Democrat is. Yeah. I mean, it used to be very different, right? Democrats were the much more racist party in America for a very, very long time. I know. I landed in Virginia when there's still Jim Crow. There were no Republicans. I think things change. Yeah. There's been this argument that the parties are in this weird transition, the Republican party to be a Republican in good standing. You need to believe the institutions are fundamentally broken. That is what Trump represents. That's why RFK Jr. can fit in the coalition now, despite being a pro-choice Democrat a couple of years ago, because he fundamentally believes the institutions are corrupt, are broken, do not represent the people, et cetera. And that the Democratic party, and I think it is intention over this with itself, but certainly under Biden and Harris, was a very, very pro-system party. It's not really about liberal and conservative. The reason Mitt Romney and Liz Cheney were clearly in coalition with Kamala Harris, while RFK Jr. And that's why the Democratic Party, the Democratic Party, and the Democratic Party, and the Democratic Party, and the Democratic Party, and the Democratic Party, and the Democratic Party, and the Democratic Party, and the Democratic Party, and the Democratic Party, and the Democratic Party, and the Democratic Party, and the Democratic Party, and the Democratic Party, and the Democratic Party, and the Democratic Party, and the Democratic Party, and the Democratic Party, and the Democratic Party, and the Democratic Party, and the Democratic Party, and the Democratic Party, and the Democratic Party, and the Democratic Party, and the Democratic Party, he was not elected to be lured over the institutions, and he had a style of governance and a rhetoric that allowed him, while still being president and in charge of everything, to distance himself from the institutions. So, you know, he could say all these criticized, even the government, very sharply, you know, as being racist or anti-feminist or whatever, and yet, you know, there he was, he was a president, right? That would have been a moment where the Democrats could have seized that high ground, I guess. And even what you're saying, what you're describing is just of now. At the times of the first Obama election, because I was in a native, I guess, the Democrats were the ones who were trying to storm the institutions and change them. Yeah, I think that the movement for the Democrats to become the pro-institutions Party, they have lost something pretty important. And I think that the really talented politicians could keep that in balance, like Obama, and Biden, who's very much a creature of Washington and was just by the time he was governing too old to make a balancing act like this work, couldn't. And if you lose the mantle of reform, I think it's very hard to win in American politics. Today, for a fact, and I think that's true on both sides, I think there is a core of people who have, because just the accident of fate that the Democrats, or even more that there were anti-Trumpism, has that been identified with pro-institutionsism. It's a core of people who then will stand up. I mean, there was a woman that was said, Uberter, there was a woman standing a street corner here in Washington with a sign that said, God bless the federal workforce, just standing there with that sign, right? So God bless her. I was one of them. But honestly, the vast majority of Americans at the level of the publics, all the various mosaics, want, perform, want change, want against, right? They are not for the institutions. They have no faith in them. So I would say that for the Democratic Party to regain its mojo, I mean, what they need is what is it that they would like to change to bring government? This enormous construct, modern government is enormous towering, daunting construct down to the level of human being. How do you humanize that thing, right? In some bizarre way, that's what Trump is trying to do without thinking about it very much. But the Democrats are even thinking. This message is brought to you by Apple Pay. Payments with Apple Pay are easy and secure. Thanks to Face ID, because unlike a physical card, it's harder to steal your face. Compatible devices required, terms apply. The New York Times app has all this stuff that you may not have seen. The way the tabs are at the top with all of the different sections. I could immediately navigate to something that matches what I'm feeling. Playboardal or connections and then swipe over to read today's headlines. There's an article next to a recipe next to games and it's just easy to get everything in one place. This app is essential. The New York Times app, all of the times, all in one place. Download it now at nytimes.com slash app. Here's what I worry about with Trump. I mean, among many things, I've many worries about Donald Trump. But one is that the ways humanizing it is through himself. And you were saying earlier this question of, for what? What is it the end of all this breakage? What steady state are they trying to achieve? I found the Eric Adams thing extremely, extremely alarming and telling because here's a guy who is under investigation for what appear to be pretty clear acts of corruption. He's a democratic mayor, right? He's not somebody who Donald Trump needs to be loyal to. And it seems like what they saw was the ability. And frankly, what Eric Adams saw was the possibility that if he would signal to Trump that he would pledge allegiance, he would be in Trump's pocket. Trump would take the heat off of him. When I look internationally, I see a sort of similar thing. You know, the countries that are willing to tell Trump he's great and each other on his side, be that Russia or anybody else, they can get the deal. And if you're not willing to do that, you can't get the deal. The thing on the other side of this is patronage is a personal regime where what you do doesn't matter what matters is who you pledge fealty to. I won't touch the idea at the Adams case because I don't really know the details of whether that case was good or not. But I think what the sensation is of the people on his side is here, all these bureaucrats is deep states and these Democrats and so forth who have been lording it over us. And now they realize they're just like me. They're crying out just like we've been crying out. So they were listening when we cried and now he's making the cry out. The thing is the case of the high being brought down as much as and I'm not going to deny that there's a huge personalistic aspect of Trump starting with Trump himself. But I think there's much of that as he is perceived as the hero who's bringing the high down low, right? And that is very humanizing and it's very democratizing if you believe that that's what's happening. So then if you don't think that's what it is. not just personalism, it's not just a government that Trump and Musk can control for whatever purposes they want to control it. What's your positive vision of this? Like you sort of said, it's sort of what maybe think it'd be interesting to have you on the show for this, that this was the first time you saw a revolt like this moving beyond negation. You saw moving to some kind of positive agenda. When you are feeling hopeful, what do you think they are trying to do and what do you think we might try to do with this system if they can grasp it in their fist? If you tell me what I would hope it would all end up as is it would be a much leaner, far more responsive, far less politicized, far more AI friendly, far more digitized and therefore the levels of hierarchy much lower than what we had in the 20th century and trusted by the people, trusted by the people. So if you have a government that is, say the equivalent of in many cases when you talk about services of Amazon, right? Amazon is just a thing you trusted, you push a button and it's there on your doorstep, okay? The government you go with a paper and you have to go, you know, please can you do this and they say no, you have to change, you have to do, do, do, do, do, do, do. So my ideal vision of where the Democratic small D Democratic government in Washington would be federal government would be one that is very flat, very responsive, very interactive, very, very, very, very, very digitized and trusted by the people. Two things or a couple of things come up from you when you are for that vision and I'm not saying you're saying it's their vision. But one is that providing what responsive to what I mean, this is a group that is about to do cuts to food stamps or snap is it's called now cuts to Medicaid. This question of what is this leaner government providing and what is it not providing? Seems like a much more fundamental question. And then also there's this question of whether or not responsiveness is in the way you're talking about it and in the way you want people to react to it is possible under the informational conditions you describe. So like as an example, they're doing pretty indiscriminate cuts across the government right now. You have to have a pretty low opinion of the government and they do, but I don't. To think that's not going to end up with problems emerging, right? They're cutting all kinds of employees, not really knowing where they're cutting from, cutting up probationary employees. Things are going to break, I think they might break at least and then people are going to be upset about that breaking. This is why government reform is hard as you know as a bureaucrat. I mean, people wanted to modernize the IRS master file systems for decades and the problem is they're very old and very easy to break and if you break them, you break the entire tax filing system, right? And it's just a huge intense mass. And so does the kind of failures that getting from here to there require the breakings, the glitches, the fights, mobilize too much of the public against you create too much of these constant informational backlashes to do it. Like what is the optimal strategy under informational revolt conditions? Well, we have is a revolution and it's thank goodness is an American style revolution. FDR had one Reagan had one. Guillotines were not brought out, nobody died, okay? But you have a revolution FDR and Reagan and this one are messy, all right? They're just messy and mistakes will be made. I think if you want to have pessimistic view, this is a remarkably unself reflected bunch or there are a bunch of action people, I mean, Musk and even RFK, Jr and Sir Lee Trump, these people who want to do things. That's not a bad thing, but you need somebody to explain what the hell you're doing. You know, you need to explain as we were talking about before, what's the end state? Why did you take the step here? What's are you doing it because the next step is going to be over there and this is a logical place to be? Or are you just kind of like ramming through and tearing up things as you go along? It is unclear to me by the way, which of those cases it is. It's clear that Elon Musk has a plan and it's all AI, but where he said it with that, I have no idea. I want to go back to a question sort of as we close and ask you at the beginning because I think this maybe puts a point on it. I'd asked you, are elites today worse than they were? Do we think they're worse than they were or have modern conditions led to them? Us thinking they're worse than they were made them worse than they are. We're having that conversation. I was thinking about something Julian Assange wrote who was a founder of WikiLeaks. He basically said that the point of WikiLeaks was that if you can pull all the internal information out of the system, make it public, you make it impossible for large systems to function because they need to have the ability to communicate privately. They need to be able to speak in secrecy. His view is that WikiLeaks was actually a way of destroying the capacity of these bureaucracies to operate and he thought they were bad and that was a good thing. What I see Elon Musk doing right now is pulling in these informational databases and using things that either he is, sometimes lying about, or things that he is pulling out to make a look bad. We are funding a scientific research study that just sounds weird when you hear it because frankly a lot of them do and a lot of important findings come out of weird research. Those conditions of informational transparency, many people make this argument that Congress has not been improved by the addition of CSPAN cameras. Hearings are not better because things can be clipped out of them. It just makes it harder for people to negotiate and deal. There's all kinds of things where, I don't know, as an ideology, transparency and putting it on the chain seems great and putting a camera on everything. Barack Obama used to say that the negotiations over healthcare form would all be on CSPAN. They weren't people got mad, but they would have been worse if they were all on CSPAN. You can't negotiate everything in public. I'm curious how you think about that because this seems to me like the informational world we're in creates a constant pressure for transparency. Transparency is typically either bad for the way systems work or is weaponized against systems by people who don't like the way they're working or what they're trying to do. The system gets worse and so we demand more transparency. Large, complex institutions need to have places where things happen in whispers and the what it hears to get anything done. Having said that, forget it. It ain't going to happen. We are now in an entirely different world. So what we need is elites, people in charge of things. I just call them that. Who can deal in this world when you're under the spotlight at all times in a way that is number one, functionally, you can get things done. But number two, look trustworthy to the millions of people who are going to be watching you either online or through some system or another. I mean, see Spanish that Joe, I can't believe that Congress having a camera in front of it doesn't provide a show. There's anything more disruptive bizarre and almost like theater of the absurd than watching those committees work, right? But they had the opportunity. This is not the camera's fault. Is there fault, all right? So they also not better when they try to provide a show. I mean, I will just say this that I think the move towards members of Congress who what they're trying to do is provide a show does not make hearings better. And incentivizes for grandstanders and performers. And that's not a show. That's just that's grandstanding, right? There has to be a way which the pieces I could show is there's a story and somebody's controlling it. There's a director and then there's opposition and kind of like a trial is kind of like a show. That's not what happens. So I actually think it's possible to do. I think with the digital, with AI in particular, it's possible to get some version of that. But we need people in charge, people at the top of the institutions who are comfortable and believable in that role. You made this point that we're now seeing the rise of these leaders who are genuinely comfortable in this information sphere, right? Donald Trump is a native to Twitter. You call him the Beethoven of Twitter. Elon Musk liked Twitter so much he bought it and then renamed it X. And I think it's true for a lot of people in that administration. Some of them are very native to podcasting as well. You are sort of suggesting this is a good thing. One thing that I worry about is it, I sometimes think these systems select for a very unusual personality type, a personality type that is absorptive of huge amounts of negative feedback and uses that as a kind of fuel, a personality type that can be very, what it wants is engagement, what it wants is attention. It doesn't have the reaction, most normal human beings have to a lot of attention, which is like to shrink back from it a little bit to be upset if people are upset with you. It's a little bit intentionally sociopathic. And so this idea that what we're going to get now and that this is positive is rule by people who are really, really well adopted to Twitter. Like are you comfortable with that? That's a great idea. It's ruled by sociopaths, digital sociopaths. I think you're right. My take though is, okay, I said it before, there is this colossal transformation going on, we're moving from the industrial age to something, doesn't even have a name yet, okay? And we're a very early stage of this. And maybe the rule or the digital sociopaths hopefully will be an early stage that we transcend. I would say want to be present to the United States, you're not a normal human being, all right? That's fair. All ready, you are some kind of freak. And also if I may give my 30 years war metaphor, am I allowed to do that? Please. Okay. I was hoping you would do it. It's not even mine. It's originally from a fellow Cuban who said, suppose you take a time machine and go to the 30 years war. Now, you know, that that the bloodiest war that was ever fought in Europe, right? People were being slaughtered. And suppose you went there and you asked the man on the street, what do you think of the printing press? And the man knows you do say it's the most horrific conflict inducing thing that has ever been invented. Look, over there, this is a little church. And over there, there's another little church and they're coming out with their books, their printed books. And the printed books have almost exactly the same words, but like eight words are different. And they have to kill each other over that. If we didn't have a printing press, we'd be safe, right? Well, today we know that the printing press was the most liberating invention that ever happened in the human race. We had to get past that. And let's be thankful, I always say, building on Antonio's metaphor. We're not at the 30 years war level here. We're not anywhere near that. So I think we will get past that. Thank you for making some of the cycle through moments of adjustments. My concern always has been that when we get to the end, I will see it by the way. But when we're to the end, we have liberal democracy still there. Maybe even more democratic because there are many things about the digital systems and AI that empower people far more than the old analog world did. So that's my answer. Then I'll answer a final question. What are three books you recommend to the audience? We think by Andre Mir, he is the Marshall McLuhan of the 21st century. But if I had to pick one, I would pick post journalism and the death of newspapers, which is basically a history of the art for a very detailed list of the art form, kind of explaining and your newspaper is going to front on center, explaining how the Mrs. Model has changed from selling eyeballs to advertisers to sort of commodifying polarization, right? Beautiful book. Second one, a British economist, Paul Ormerad, has got a book called Why Most Things Fail. And you should read it first of all because it's a great title. Number two, because he has an economist, he's gone through the data, mostly British and American data that goes back 150 years economic data to show how governments have tried to solve, basically they've used to try to solve issues like unemployment, ethnically segregated households. And it's an all-high path that is nothing has changed. So it's a fascinating book. Third, Google Mercier, it's not born yesterday. And it's about what we talk about right now is can somebody like Donald Trump talk to you, a fairly liberal human being. And through the magic of this disinformation, suddenly you walk away thinking, I will vote for that man, whatever he goes, right? Can he persuade you through this manipulative process? And he has a lot of psychological data in there that pretty clearly explains, no, not really. People tend not to be persuaded by oratory rhetoric and tend to believe what they believe. So Google Mercier, those are my three books. Right, agree. Thank you very much. Hey, this is fun. This episode of The It's Recloncho is produced by Jack McCordock, fact-checking by Michelle Harris, mixing by Isaac Jones with a few Shapiro and Amensau Houta. Our supervising editor is Claire Gordon. The show's production team also includes Roland Hoo, Elis Isquith and Kristen Lynn. We've original music by Pat McCusker, Audie and strategy by Christina Seamulisky and Shannon Busta. The executive producer of New York Times, opinion audio is the annualist roster."}