{"Episode Name": "Poland\u2019s Foreign Minister on the Future of the War in Ukraine", "Podcast Name": "Fareed Zakaria", "Episode Link": "https://www.podtrac.com/pts/redirect.mp3/pdst.fm/e/chrt.fm/track/E31CC9/swap.fm/track/2nzGkisFXQswLYT5s325/traffic.megaphone.fm/WMHY6969934481.mp3?updated=1740369875", "duration": "2586", "text": " There's a reason the sleep number smart bed is the number one best bed for couples. It's because you can each choose what's right for you whenever you like. FURMER or softer on either side, sleep number does that. One side cooler and the other side warmer, sleep number does that too. You have to feel it to believe it. Sleep better together. And now, say 50% on the new sleep number limited edition smart bed. Limited time. Exclusively at a sleep number store near you. See store or sleep number dot com for details. Ryan Reynolds here from Mint Mobile. I don't know if you knew this, but anyone can get the same premium wireless for $15 a month plan that I've been enjoying. It's not just for celebrities. So do like I did and have one of your assistance assistants switch you to Mint Mobile today. I'm told it's super easy to do at Mint Mobile dot com slash switch. Up front payment of $45 for three month plan, equivalent to $15 per month required. Control rate first three months only then full price plan options available. Taxes and fees extra. The full terms at Mint Mobile dot com. This is GPS, the global public square. Welcome to all of you in the United States and around the world. I'm Farid Zakaria coming to you live from New York. Today on the program, a world shaking reversal in US foreign policy as Europe and Ukraine seem to become America's new adversaries at the same time as Moscow comes in from the coal. I'll talk to Poland's foreign minister, Radik Sikorski, an ardent supporter of Ukraine and an equally ardent critic of Vladimir Putin. Also, Trump's moves at the Department of Justice have exposed a weakness in the US constitutional system. The president controls the prosecutors. So what's the fix? We'll take lessons from other countries that do it other ways. And we'll put a GPS fact check on Elon Musk's claims about all the so-called fraud he says he's founded USAID. But first, here's my take. At the conclusion of talks with the Russian delegation in Saudi Arabia, Mike Walts, the US national security adviser, noted that only President Trump can do that, only President Trump could have shifted the global conversation on how to end the Ukraine war. Secretary of State Marco Rubio determined not to be outdone, quickly noted that the first important point he wanted to make was that the only leader in the world who could make this happen is President Trump. He's the only one in the world that can do that right now. Welcome to America's new North Korea-style diplomacy, where our diplomats are more worried about their boss than the adversary. It's true that Donald Trump has found a lightning-fast way to end the war in Ukraine. Surrender. At least when France fell in 1940, it did so in the wake of a German blitzkrieg that swept through the country. Ukraine has actually held back Russian forces for three years now, and despite fighting a much more powerful adversary, even taken some Russian land. He yet, the Trump administration has preemptively conceded most key Russian demands before the formal negotiations have even begun. No return of all the Ukrainian territory acquired by force. No NATO membership for Ukraine. No American troops on Ukrainian soil. And Trump trashed Zelensky, calling him a dictator, and saying, he better move fast, or he is not going to have a country left. It is no wonder that senior Russian officials, like former President Dmitry Medvedev, seem almost giddy with joy. What explains Trump's desire to sell out Ukraine and cozy up to Putin? There have been so many theories about Trump and Russia, but I think the real story here is about Trump and Zelensky. Donald Trump views almost everything from a personal lens, and his own relationship with Velo de Merz Zelensky has been fraught for many years. In 2016, Trump's campaign chairman Paul Manafort was exposed to have been on the payroll of Ukraine's former President Viktor Yanukovych, a pro-Russian politician who fled to safety and Russia in 2014 after national protests against him. Then came the allegations that Russia had interfered in the 2016 elections on Trump's behalf. As a defense to those charges, some in Trump's orbit convinced him of a strange conspiracy theory that it was actually Ukrainians pretending to be Russians who were to blame. Trump seemed convinced by this explanation, in fact, so much so that in his infamous telephone call with President Zelensky in July 2019, he asked Zelensky for two favors. He wanted the server that would show these Ukrainian efforts to interfere in the US elections and frame it on the Russians. And second, he wanted Zelensky to launch an investigation into Joe Biden and his son. The key point here is that Zelensky did not give in to Trump's pressure, even though Trump was holding up military aid to Ukraine seemingly as leverage. Essentially, Zelensky called Trump's bluff. This must have left Trump outraged, a personal affront to a man with a healthy ego. Trump recently made another ask of Zelensky, a truly bizarre one even by Trump's standards. He demanded a 50% share of Ukraine's natural resources like oil, gas, minerals in return for American military aid. Zelensky rejected this neo-colonial demand but said that some arrangement could be part of a discussion that included security guarantees for Ukraine. Still, it was a rejection of a Trump demand. Left partners, the Ukrainian American who worked with Rudolph Giuliani to pursue Trump's agenda in Ukraine, said to Politico, Trump hates Zelensky with passion and Zelensky knows it. I would guess that for Trump, Ukraine is a set of bad memories and Zelensky is a foreign leader who has not gotten with the program, constant flattery and submission to Trump's demands. The result of Zelensky's well beyond the personal. It will result in a truly historic surrender of Western interests and values built over decades. The United States has long been at the forefront of efforts to make it illegitimate to acquire territory by force. The United Nations Charter will war two, Washington urged that this idea be at the center of the United Nations Charter. At the Nuremberg trials, it required that military aggression be deemed a crime and it actively supported this principle, sending troops to fight North Korean aggression in 1950 and Iraqi aggression in 1991. The results are noted in the internationalists by Unah Hathaway and Scott Shapiro. Between 1816 and 1945, there were more than 150 territorial conquests. Since 1945, with the international system of rules and norms, the US helped create, territorial conquests have almost completely disappeared, quote unquote. And thanks to Donald Trump's personal peak, this enduring American achievement is about to be lost. Go to CNN.com slash for read for a link to my Washington Post column this week. And let's get started. Tomorrow, March 3, since Russia invaded Ukraine and began Europe's deadliest war since World War II. Peace might be in the offing, at least according to Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin, but at what cost to Ukraine and Europe. I want to bring in Poland's foreign minister, Radik Sikorski, whose country is Ukraine's neighbor and one of its strongest allies. He joins me from Washington, D.C. where he met with US Secretary of State Marco Rubio on Friday. Radik Sikorski, welcome to the show. You said after your meeting with Secretary of State Rubio that it was your impression that the United States wanted a lasting peace in Ukraine. Do you mean by that you got assurances that there would be some security guarantees for Ukraine because after all, that is what has been the problem. The lasting peace part of it, Russia has invaded in 2014, invaded in 2022, and potentially could invade again. Ukraine remember already has security guarantees under the Budapest Memorandum, given back in 1994. I think in return for what was then the world's third largest nuclear stockpile, which the Ukrainians handed over to Russia. Ukraine also has a border treaty with Russia that guaranteed the border between two countries and three years after the war, after the beginning of the invasion. Ukraine has defended the great bulk of its territory. The best guarantee for Ukraine is the almost million man army, which is manning the foxholes and heroically resisting our Russian aggression. But yes, if we are to have a durable peace, it has to be one that both sides can live with above all the victim of aggression. What do you understand the United States' strategy right now? President Trump is frankly trashing a Zelenski, calling him a dictator, saying he has been a very weak negotiator. Doesn't really need to be at the negotiation table. After a defense, Pete Hadsick has essentially conceded several of Russia's demands, saying it's unrealistic to expect that Ukraine will get back all its territory, ruled out NATO membership, ruled out US troops on Ukraine. And now the United States is thwarting a UN resolution, which says that Russian aggression is to blame for this conflict. What do you think is the strategy here? I think every new administration always takes a bit of time to find its feet and to assess the full information from intelligence agencies and so on. And it's talking to allies where I was very glad to be able to speak to a first general Kellogg, then my corubia also to the National Security Advisor World. And consultations with allies are good things. But remember, it's Ukraine that decides whether she wants to fight or not. This is \u2013 I was in Munich and you know what happened in Munich in 38, the Czechoslovakia was dictated to, but that was because Czechoslovakia wasn't ready to fight alone and didn't have allies. Ukraine is fighting and rather successfully defeated the Russians at sea, for example, and has allies. We in Europe have said that we will continue to support Ukraine, Kammutme. Will Poland back the American alternative to the Ukrainian resolution in the General Assembly? The Ukrainian one squarely says Russian aggression caused this conflict. The United States' resolution is essentially a delete-stat sentence and makes no reference to Russian aggression. We need to call Spader Spader. Three years ago, there was an overwhelming vote in the UN General Assembly condemning the Russian aggression, and this continues to be the case. When you think about the end of this war, in your view, is it possible that Ukraine can survive and be strong with no guarantees in security terms from either NATO or the European Union, and can the European Union give such guarantees? It's not really a security organization. Well, Ukraine, remember, has 110 brigades in the field. They've destroyed most of Russia's tanks. They produced 1.5 million drones last year. They are going to produce 4.5 million drones this year. If you'd asked me three years ago where Ukraine and Russia would be in this war in three years time, I don't think either of us would have guessed that Russia would only capture 20% of Ukraine's territory. And Putin, did you notice yesterday, interesting piece of news, has secretly sold 100 tons of Russia's gold. The Russian economy is getting into trouble. He has thrown everything he has in the last few months with these peric victories, sacrificing thousands of soldiers to gain a village or two, precisely for this moment to put himself in a position where he appears to be stronger than he is. Ukraine can fight on its own with our European support for the rest of this year, and I think the Putin has to take this into account. Stay with us. When we come back, I'm going to ask Radik Sikorski, what does Europe do in a new world where the United States' support cannot be taken for granted when we come back? The United States has been a great place to be. And the rest of us are going to be the first to be the first to be the first to be the first to be the first to be the first to be the first to be the first to be the first to be the first to be the first to be the first to be the first to be the first to be the first to be the first to be the first to be the first to be the first to be the first to be the first to be the first to be the first to be the first to be the first to be the first to be the the first to be the first to be the first to be the first to be the first to be the first to be the first to be the second to be the first to be the first to be the first to be the first to be the first to be the first to be the second to be the second to be the deserves their shot at the American dream. So if you're feeling locked out of home ownership we're here to give you back to keys. We're opening doors, breaking down walls and doing everything we can to turn renters into owners and we're not going to stop until we help everyone home. To find out more visit rocket.com rocket on the dream. And we're back to talk about Russia's war on Ukraine and Europe's response with Poland's foreign minister, Radik Sakhorski. He joins me from Washington DC. Radik, the financial times has said that the United States has made a historic move for the first time in eight decades effectively. Turning its back on its allies turned, actually turned on its allies, treating them as adversaries. Friedrich Mertz, the man likely to become chancellor of Germany, says Germany can no longer be sure that America will protect it. Do you worry about the same thing? Can Poland be sure that in the event of a Russian attack on Poland, the United States will come to its defense today? Well, that's the essence of NATO and we were the full United States in Iraq. Above all, in Afghanistan, we sent a brigade when the United States was attacked and alliance is a relationship. And yesterday, Poland's president spoke to President Trump, iceberg to the national security adviser and nothing has changed in that. We are good allies. And I hope we continue to be. But what we agree with the Trump administration is that some European allies have lagged behind in their readiness. Poland has been spending 2% of GDP on the fence for 20 years. We're now at almost five and we'll continue to do so. The majority of allies have now come up to scratch. We need to do a better job of it. And there is determination to do what is up to us. Mertz even talked about the possibility of Germany having to rely on French and British nuclear protection because he worried that the United States would not actually come through. Do you worry about that? Would you worry about a Germany that decided it needed to take its security into its own hands, given that Poland has been a victim of German aggression over centuries? We are good allies with Germany, Germany is our biggest trading partner. But remember, Germany is banned from having nuclear weapons by its unification treaty and also has a ceiling of, I think, 300,000 troops. But we need a partnership in Europe to the Putin to do our bit. And this is this is happening. One theory about what Donald Trump is doing is that he's trying to win the Russians off the Chinese, off their tight alliance with China. Do you think you've travelled extensively to both places? You've been far more than just a two, this is your second time around. Do you think it would work? Well, trying to do a Kissinger in reverse is of course attempting intellectual construct. I think with the current solidarity of dictators between Vladimir Putin and the President Xi Jinping, it's unlikely to succeed. Let us do what can be achieved, which is to support Ukraine, to bring Russia to her senses with growth from Ukraine, and then we'll have a more peaceful world with a more reasonable Russia, and a more reasonable China. What do you make of the deal that the United States is trying to make with Ukraine to get what I think President Zelensky just said at a new conference? Two dollars back from Ukraine for every dollar of military aid it has given. Does that strike up? European Union has actually in total given more aid to Ukraine. Does it strike you as a reasonable ask for the United States to make off Ukraine? Poland holds the presidency of the EU, and I'll be speaking on behalf of the EU at the Security Council in New York tomorrow, and yes, you're right. By our figures, the United States has contributed just over a hundred billion to Ukraine, mostly militarily, militarily more than Europe, but overall we think we are at about 145. But maybe that means that the US wants to give Ukraine much more support, which the US believes should be refunded. Maybe this is good news. Right, Zagorski, you're looking for good news in everything. So let me ask you, if in fact this is a new world, as so many people are predicting, whether the United States is withdrawing and countries are going to fend for themselves, will Europe you think make greater overtures to China? Is it possible that Europe diverges from the US policy on China and finds a way to have a working relationship that's much more constructive? I helped to formulate Europe's policy towards China in my previous role as a member of the European Parliament, and it's in a slogan, collaborate were possible on global issues, compete when needed, plenty of that, and confront when necessary. And I think this is sensible. The transatlantic bargain is that the US helps us to put in, in return, we buy American and we express our solidarity with the US on many international issues, including its competition with China and the deal obviously works both ways. Right, Zagorski, always a pleasure to have you on. Thank you, sir. Thank you. Next on GPS, Trump's recent moves at the Justice Department have raised the question, should the president have control over federal prosecutors? What do other countries do? I'll ask an expert after the break. Donald Trump took office, vowing to end what he called the weaponization of the Department of Justice, which investigated and tried to prosecute him. But critics say this now, the Trump administration, that is weaponizing the DOJ, purging prosecutors who worked on the Trump cases and moving to dismiss the case against New York Mayor Eric Adams so that the American help with the administration's immigration crackdown. Does this show a defect in the US constitutional system since federal prosecutors are under the president's authority to help us understand this. I want to bring in Rachel Barker. She is a professor at NYU Law School and she has a terrific book out next month on a somewhat different but important topic. Justice abandoned how the Supreme Court ignored the Constitution and enabled mass incarceration. Pleasure to have you on, Rachel. To me, it's always as somebody who tries to look at the world in comparative perspective. I'm always struck by how other liberal democracies in the Western world particularly have moved over the last few decades, after World War II, to create a kind of independent justice system. That is separate from and not under the direct control of the prime minister or the president say in Britain, for example, or Canada. The United States has the oldest constitutional system in the world in a sense and one of the features is that it is still this kind of Tudor political system where the prosecutorial branch is under the the the president's authority. So is that a fundamental problem? It doesn't help but I don't think that's the fundamental problem because we you know we had a good run in the United States history where even with that model everybody understood that the attorney general needs to be separate from the White House. You know the White House should not interfere in individual cases. There was an understanding that for the rule of law you need to have prosecutors who are independent from politics and the executive branch. And I think what we're seeing now is a breakdown in that norm and it might be easier to effectuate because we have an attorney general that's under the president in our executive branch structure. But at the end of the day it's really the breakdown in a norm where everybody previously understood. Yes, of course this needs to be independent and I fear what we're seeing now is a dismantling of that. So and after Watergate it seems like there was clearly kind of a massive abuse of presidential power and war again Nixon tried to use the Department of Justice, the CIA, the FBI. They were built a whole bunch of additional constraints right put in place and norms is that what the Trump administration is kind of trying to either ignore or erode. Yeah, you know I think we're seeing the cycle of history here because I think what happened with President Nixon and him trying to fire the people investigating him and was there was a reaction after that that said wow we have a constitutional flaw here and Congress responded by passing a statute that created what's known as an independent counsel and the problem with that structure or at least as the public perceived it was that also looked political. That also looked like independent councils were behaving in ways that went too far and they didn't seem accountable and so I think we see in kind of an ebb and flow where you want independence but you also want to make sure that you have some accountability with prosecutors and I think post-water date everyone was very sensitive to independence. There was this sense that you know we really needed to shield the White House from the Attorney General that's actually what started getting kind of written into the protocols between the White House and the Attorney General and the Department of Justice were post-Nixon but I think we're seeing an erosion of that because I think a lot of people forget how bad it could be if you have a president interfering with the Department of Justice. You know independent judiciary is so much a core part of liberal democracy but you know what all of this highlights is even that at the end of the day depends on norms because if a court rules for example, unfreeze the USAID spending because Congress appropriated that money the president does not have the authority to simply stop spending it. If the president doesn't obey the order the court doesn't have an army. Yeah no it's true and I think what it you know you mentioned that we have lots of different miles of prosecution around the world and we have somewhere there set up to be you know completely independent. Some are in the judicial branch and at the end of the day when people have researched what works you know the things that really hold and check independence are things like a free press so that the public can be made aware when there's corruption or there's attempts to influence things on a political basis and independent judiciary is really important but at the end of the day you need the public to understand why they're important and and you need there to be an outcry if you had an elected official who wants to float that and you know I think we might be stressed tested in the United States soon where I think President Trump is going to see how far he can go on that authoritarian path and there'll be a question to how the public responds to that you know will there be an outcry and I think we'll see what the reaction is not not just the public I should say the markets because there's also an economic component to all of this which is countries that don't have good independent judiciary and independent prosecutors you know when you don't have those rule of law norms it destabilizes everything in your country including the economy and so there might be some economic pressure as well to try to keep him in check Congress really isn't much of a check when it's dominated by the same party as the president in power at least when it's Republicans because they seem unconcerned by what they're seeing and really not speaking out and so I think it'll come down to if we get to the Supreme Court and the Supreme Court says certain things are off limits then what happens? Rachel pleasure to have you on oh thanks so much next on GPS Democrats are struggling to oppose Trump's agenda but when they've been in power they have also struggled to actually implement their own agenda we'll discuss why in a fascinating new book when we come back. This episode is brought to you by PDS debt struggling with credit cards personal loans medical bills their collections it's time to stop worrying about that high interest debt you've got piling up PDS debt can help you start saving money immediately their platform can analyze your unique situation and create a plan to get you out of debt there's no minimum credit score required and it takes 30 seconds to get your results with PDS debt you'll take back control of your finances get a free debt analysis in just 30 seconds at pds debt.com slash Spotify great days start with great underwear and Tommy John makes the greatest with Tommy John you make each day better than the last and with over 20 million pair of sold and thousands of five-star reviews guys everywhere love their Tommy John plus you're fully covered with Tommy John's best pair you'll ever wear or its free guarantee grab 25% off your first order now at Tommy John dot com slash Spotify say 25% at Tommy John dot com slash Spotify see cypher details. One can agree or disagree with the Trump administration's rapid disruption of the American government but one thing this space of change has done is highlight something about the opposition the Democratic Party prides itself in bringing change through good governance but even after passing sweeping legislation such as the inflation reduction act it has struggled to actually achieve large scale changes on the ground why is that the author Mark Duncanman explores this very idea about the progressive movement in America in his new book why nothing works who killed progress and how to bring it back mark is a fellow at Brown University's Watson Institute for International and Public Affairs Mark pleasure have you on so let's start with a with a fascinating example in the book Mike Bloomberg has this idea as mayor of New York that he will make a bit for the Olympics and the reason he wanted to do this was it was a forcing mechanism to get all kinds of modernization of New York infrastructure that people have been waiting for decades to do that this would be the way that you'd get it all done he lines up everything to be able to do it one state legislature votes against a key provision of it and the whole thing crumbles explain how that can be why do you have a system where there are so many vetoes well in the 1950s 1960s the Rockefeller administration had over spent and spent the New York state was over its skis so that it was spending more money than it had and it all came crashing down in the 1970s in that point it seemed as though the thing that we needed to do was create new checks on New York state government in all facets so one of the things it was created almost without anyone thinking about it was something called the public authorities control board nobody knew what it was the time no one gave much thought but what it was was that any major capital expenditure needed to have the approval of the governor of the state assembly speaker and of the senate president all three and if anyone said no the investment was off so in this case it's that that was in the 1970s this is the mid 2000s it's been 30 years no one really even remembers the public authorities control board except for the speaker of the state assembly a man who would eventually perish in jail for corruption Shelley Silver is told by one of his benefactors that they don't want this project to move forward and he uses his veto and upends the entire thing and the Olympics go to London it's an example of a larger trend that you describe in the book which is of a liberalism that was able to do astonishing things I mean you describe the Tennessee Valley authority it's you know it tells remind people what it was and you know this is what the Roosevelt administration did yeah it's a sort of remembered almost as a one-off of the new deal but it was this remarkable bureaucracy created right at the beginning of the Roosevelt administration that takes an area of the country the upper south that's basically the size of England and gives power to essentially one figure named David Lulanthal who is then empowered to damn the rivers and reforist the mountainsides to do massive changes in this region basically to hook up poor farms to electro cities so they can modernize the lives and there's a notion at the time of very patriarchal notion that they're going to civilize this sort of Neanderthals who live in the center of the country and the project which seems can seem almost sort of politically gross to us today was enormously successful in actually spreading wealth to this huge swath of the well abroad electricity to this entire you know rural poor population exactly right and so like it was incredibly successful and really did create an economic transformation and when you look at this do you sense that there is a kind of turning of the tide I mean it feels in built into the system you know the environmental reviews or all that kind of thing it's difficult to see how it changes well it changed once progressiveism was born at the beginning of the 20th century to move the courts out of the way to allow bureaucracies to do big things like the Tennessee Valley Authority then we go through a change in the 60s and 70s where people realize yikes these powerful bureaucracies are abusive coercive almost settler colonial in some sense to use some of the modern parlance and we've been getting to create new checks we can go back to full circle progressiveism we can know that our own tradition originally wanted to create bureaucracies that could make decisions expeditiously and so the challenge now is to find some balance between the old system which moved too fast and did things that were too disruptive and the new system that can't move at all and can't solve our big problems climate change economic mobility high speed rail none of these things can get done unless we change the systems underneath them I think that progressives rather than saying we need to defend all of these institutions we should be the one saying these institutions aren't working for people and we're going to reform them in ways that will begin delivering for people we are as they're across the party of government people think of us as the party of government and we have to acknowledge that government isn't working and it's not something that you can just change your rhetoric and convince them that actually government does work it's it's plain to everyone they can see they can see we need to be aware of it we need to be talking about it we need to be acknowledging it and we need to be offering plans to fix it Mark Franklin pleasure of you on thanks for having me next on GPS Elon Musk calls us a ID of vipers nest of radical left Marxist who hate America I'll tell you why he's wrong when we come back and now for the last look when Elon Musk's Doge began its quest to shrink the federal government it did not start with social security and it's 1.5 trillion dollar budget 21% of the entire government's outlays or the Pentagon which will spend 850 billion dollars this year no it bounced on a somewhat obscure agency that most Americans probably didn't know existed USAID with a budget of about 40 billion less than 1% of federal spending Trump called the 63 year old organization a fraud and a big scam Musk tweeted that USAID is a criminal organization and it was time for it to die Trump Musk and other officials have listed a series of programs that they say proves that the agency is wasteful and corrupt obviously they have cherry picked ones that they think are especially outrageous except there are closer examination one finds that these expenditures are neither fraudulent nor even that indefensible I'll start with one of the most infamous White House press secretary Caroline Levitt said that the Trump administration has halted a program that would have spent 50 million dollars to send condoms to Gaza they turned out to be patently false which Musk later admitted in the previous three years USAID spent no money on sending condoms anywhere in the Middle East one reporter asked Musk if the administration might have been looking at a contraceptive program in Gaza Mozambique that's a province in the East African country with no connection whatsoever to the Gaza Strip now Mozambique has the fifth highest HIV prevalence in the world and condoms are actually the cheapest way to prevent the spread of sexually transmitted diseases a whole lot cheaper and easier than the anti-retroviral medication needed after someone is infected with HIV or let's look at another program that the Trump administration singled out earlier this month Musk tweeted that his department of government efficiency canceled a 17 million dollar project to provide tax policy advice to Liberia why would anyone think that this is a good use of your tax money he wrote again it's not entirely clear which program Musk is referring to so much for accuracy and transparency but USAID has in the past run programs that support the reform of Liberia's tax laws enabling the government to increase revenues and improve governance now over the decades a central pillar of US foreign policy has been to encourage other countries to become more capitalist more market friendly and economically open Liberia is a long-time ally why is this a bad use of a few million dollars press secretary Levitt divided a USAID program that sent 1.5 million dollars to as she said advanced DEI in Serbia's workplaces now this is true this grant was to a local organization to promote diversity in general and reduce workplace discrimination against Serbia's LGBTQ community recall that the Balkans is a region scarred by sectarianism and violence fostering a less tribal more open and inclusive society could help prevent conflict of course you might disagree that these are wise expenditures of taxpayer money the Trump administration obviously does so it should shut them down but nothing we have learned about them suggests fraud or corruption something Trump and his aides keep suggesting programs you don't agree with are not evidence of malfeasance but of course the Trump administration's focus on a handful of small grants is meant to paint the work of the agency as crazy and radical shoveling money to foreigners it's an easy way to carry favor with the magga base in fact USAID is a serious organization that has worked on a eradicating polio on easing famine in the most desperate places in the world on cleaning up agent orange poison that the US inflicted on Vietnam most of its money is spent providing medicines health care and food as the agencies head under George W Bush Andrew Nautziers a self-described conservative Republican told 60 minutes 40% of the staff are accountants and lawyers actively watching out for graft he called it the most accountable aid agency in the world it's always been a source of pride to me that as the richest country on the planet the United States was also the most generous every box of medicines every bag of grains sent to help the sick and hungry had stamped on it from the American people but now because politicians in Washington decided to score some cheap political points those bags are empty and the poorest people in the world will be the ones to pay the price thanks to all of you who've been part of my program this week I will see you next week there's a reason the sleep number smart bed is the number one best bed for couples it's because you can each choose what's right for you whenever you like firmer or softer on either side sleep number does that one side cooler and the other side warmer sleep number does that too you have to feel it to believe it sleep better together and now say 50% on the new sleep number limited edition smart bed limited time exclusively at a sleep number store near you see store or sleep number dot com for details"}